README.md, before:

# lflog

Query log files with SQL using DataFusion and regex pattern macros.

## Features

- 🔍 **SQL Queries** - Query log files using familiar SQL syntax via [DataFusion](https://datafusion.apache.org/)
- 🧩 **Pattern Macros** - Use intuitive macros like `{{timestamp:datetime("%Y-%m-%d")}}` instead of raw regex
- 📊 **Type Inference** - Automatic schema generation with proper types (Int32, Float64, String)
- ⚡ **Fast** - Leverages DataFusion's optimized query engine
- 📝 **Config Profiles** - Define reusable log profiles in TOML config files
- 💻 **Interactive REPL** - Query logs interactively with command history

## Installation

```bash
cargo build --release
```

## CLI Usage

```bash
lflog <log_file> [OPTIONS]
```

### Options

| Option | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `-c, --config <path>` | Config file (default: `~/.config/lflog/config.toml` or `LFLOG_CONFIG` env) |
| `-p, --profile <name>` | Use profile from config |
| `--pattern <regex>` | Inline pattern (overrides profile) |
| `-t, --table <name>` | Table name for SQL (default: `log`) |
| `-q, --query <sql>` | Execute SQL query (omit for interactive mode) |

### Examples

```bash
# Query with inline pattern
lflog loghub/Apache/Apache_2k.log \
  --pattern '^\[{{time:any}}\] \[{{level:var_name}}\] {{message:any}}$' \
  --query "SELECT * FROM log WHERE level = 'error' LIMIT 10"

# Query with config profile
lflog /var/log/apache.log --profile apache --query "SELECT * FROM log LIMIT 5"

# Interactive REPL mode
lflog server.log --pattern '{{ts:datetime}} [{{level:var_name}}] {{msg:any}}'
> SELECT * FROM log WHERE level = 'error'
> SELECT level, COUNT(*) FROM log GROUP BY level
> .exit
```

## Config File

Create `~/.config/lflog/config.toml`:

```toml
# Global custom macros
[[custom_macros]]
name = "timestamp"
pattern = '\\d{4}-\\d{2}-\\d{2} \\d{2}:\\d{2}:\\d{2}'
type_hint = "DateTime"

# Apache log profile
[[profiles]]
name = "apache"
description = "Apache error log format"
pattern = '^\[{{time:datetime("%a %b %d %H:%M:%S %Y")}}\] \[{{level:var_name}}\] {{message:any}}$'

# Nginx access log profile
[[profiles]]
name = "nginx"
pattern = '{{ip:ip}} - - \[{{time:any}}\] "{{method:var_name}} {{path:any}}" {{status:number}} {{bytes:number}}'
```

## Pattern Macros

| Macro | Description | Type |
|-------|-------------|------|
| `{{field:number}}` | Integer (digits) | Int32 |
| `{{field:string}}` | Non-greedy string | String |
| `{{field:any}}` | Non-greedy match all | String |
| `{{field:var_name}}` | Identifier (`[A-Za-z_][A-Za-z0-9_]*`) | String |
| `{{field:datetime("%fmt")}}` | Datetime with strftime format | String |
| `{{field:enum(a,b,c)}}` | One of the listed values | String |
| `{{field:uuid}}` | UUID format | String |
| `{{field:ip}}` | IPv4 address | String |

You can also use raw regex with named capture groups:

```regex
^(?P<ip>\d+\.\d+\.\d+\.\d+) - (?P<method>\w+)
```

## Library Usage

```rust
use lflog::{LfLog, QueryOptions};

#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> anyhow::Result<()> {
    // With inline pattern
    let lflog = LfLog::new();
    
    lflog.register(
        QueryOptions::new("access.log")
            .with_pattern(r#"^\[{{time:any}}\] \[{{level:var_name}}\] {{message:any}}$"#)
    )?;
    
    lflog.query_and_show("SELECT * FROM log WHERE level = 'error'").await?;
    Ok(())
}
```

Or with config profiles:

```rust
use lflog::{LfLog, QueryOptions};

#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> anyhow::Result<()> {
    let lflog = LfLog::from_config("~/.config/lflog/config.toml")?;
    
    lflog.register(
        QueryOptions::new("/var/log/apache.log")
            .with_profile("apache")
    )?;
    
    let df = lflog.query("SELECT level, COUNT(*) FROM log GROUP BY level").await?;
    df.show().await?;
    Ok(())
}
```

## Project Structure

```
src/
├── lib.rs              # Public API
├── app.rs              # LfLog application struct
├── types.rs            # FieldType enum
├── scanner.rs          # Pattern matching
├── macros/             # Macro expansion
│   ├── parser.rs       # Config & macro parsing
│   └── expander.rs     # Macro to regex expansion
├── datafusion/         # DataFusion integration
│   ├── builder.rs
│   ├── provider.rs
│   └── exec.rs
└── bin/
    ├── lflog.rs        # Main CLI
    └── lf_run.rs       # Simple runner (deprecated)
```

## License

MIT

Commit message:

docs: add demo instructions to README

README.md, after:

# lflog

Query log files with SQL using DataFusion and regex pattern macros.

## Features

- 🔍 **SQL Queries** - Query log files using familiar SQL syntax via [DataFusion](https://datafusion.apache.org/)
- 🧩 **Pattern Macros** - Use intuitive macros like `{{timestamp:datetime("%Y-%m-%d")}}` instead of raw regex
- 📊 **Type Inference** - Automatic schema generation with proper types (Int32, Float64, String)
- ⚡ **Fast** - Leverages DataFusion's optimized query engine
- 📝 **Config Profiles** - Define reusable log profiles in TOML config files
- 💻 **Interactive REPL** - Query logs interactively with command history

## Installation

```bash
cargo build --release
```

## CLI Usage

```bash
lflog <log_file> [OPTIONS]
```

### Options

| Option | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `-c, --config <path>` | Config file (default: `~/.config/lflog/config.toml` or `LFLOG_CONFIG` env) |
| `-p, --profile <name>` | Use profile from config |
| `--pattern <regex>` | Inline pattern (overrides profile) |
| `-t, --table <name>` | Table name for SQL (default: `log`) |
| `-q, --query <sql>` | Execute SQL query (omit for interactive mode) |

### Examples

```bash
# Query with inline pattern
lflog loghub/Apache/Apache_2k.log \
  --pattern '^\[{{time:any}}\] \[{{level:var_name}}\] {{message:any}}$' \
  --query "SELECT * FROM log WHERE level = 'error' LIMIT 10"

# Query with config profile
lflog /var/log/apache.log --profile apache --query "SELECT * FROM log LIMIT 5"

# Interactive REPL mode
lflog server.log --pattern '{{ts:datetime}} [{{level:var_name}}] {{msg:any}}'
> SELECT * FROM log WHERE level = 'error'
> SELECT level, COUNT(*) FROM log GROUP BY level
> .exit
```

## Demos (Loghub)

`lflog` includes a comprehensive set of demos using the [Loghub](https://github.com/logpai/loghub) dataset collection. These demos showcase how to query 16 different types of system logs (Android, Apache, Hadoop, HDFS, Linux, Spark, etc.).

To run a demo:

```bash
# 1. Go to the demo scripts directory
cd examples/loghub_demos/scripts

# 2. Run the demo for a specific dataset (e.g., Apache)
./run_demo.sh apache
```

See [examples/loghub_demos/README.md](examples/loghub_demos/README.md) for the full list of available datasets and more details.

## Config File

Create `~/.config/lflog/config.toml`:

```toml
# Global custom macros
[[custom_macros]]
name = "timestamp"
pattern = '\\d{4}-\\d{2}-\\d{2} \\d{2}:\\d{2}:\\d{2}'
type_hint = "DateTime"

# Apache log profile
[[profiles]]
name = "apache"
description = "Apache error log format"
pattern = '^\[{{time:datetime("%a %b %d %H:%M:%S %Y")}}\] \[{{level:var_name}}\] {{message:any}}$'

# Nginx access log profile
[[profiles]]
name = "nginx"
pattern = '{{ip:ip}} - - \[{{time:any}}\] "{{method:var_name}} {{path:any}}" {{status:number}} {{bytes:number}}'
```

## Pattern Macros

| Macro | Description | Type |
|-------|-------------|------|
| `{{field:number}}` | Integer (digits) | Int32 |
| `{{field:string}}` | Non-greedy string | String |
| `{{field:any}}` | Non-greedy match all | String |
| `{{field:var_name}}` | Identifier (`[A-Za-z_][A-Za-z0-9_]*`) | String |
| `{{field:datetime("%fmt")}}` | Datetime with strftime format | String |
| `{{field:enum(a,b,c)}}` | One of the listed values | String |
| `{{field:uuid}}` | UUID format | String |
| `{{field:ip}}` | IPv4 address | String |

You can also use raw regex with named capture groups:

```regex
^(?P<ip>\d+\.\d+\.\d+\.\d+) - (?P<method>\w+)
```

## Library Usage

```rust
use lflog::{LfLog, QueryOptions};

#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> anyhow::Result<()> {
    // With inline pattern
    let lflog = LfLog::new();
    
    lflog.register(
        QueryOptions::new("access.log")
            .with_pattern(r#"^\[{{time:any}}\] \[{{level:var_name}}\] {{message:any}}$"#)
    )?;
    
    lflog.query_and_show("SELECT * FROM log WHERE level = 'error'").await?;
    Ok(())
}
```

Or with config profiles:

```rust
use lflog::{LfLog, QueryOptions};

#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> anyhow::Result<()> {
    let lflog = LfLog::from_config("~/.config/lflog/config.toml")?;
    
    lflog.register(
        QueryOptions::new("/var/log/apache.log")
            .with_profile("apache")
    )?;
    
    let df = lflog.query("SELECT level, COUNT(*) FROM log GROUP BY level").await?;
    df.show().await?;
    Ok(())
}
```

## Project Structure

```
src/
├── lib.rs              # Public API
├── app.rs              # LfLog application struct
├── types.rs            # FieldType enum
├── scanner.rs          # Pattern matching
├── macros/             # Macro expansion
│   ├── parser.rs       # Config & macro parsing
│   └── expander.rs     # Macro to regex expansion
├── datafusion/         # DataFusion integration
│   ├── builder.rs
│   ├── provider.rs
│   └── exec.rs
└── bin/
    ├── lflog.rs        # Main CLI
    └── lf_run.rs       # Simple runner (deprecated)
```

## License

MIT
